---
title: 1b: Data Structures and Additional Forms
published: 2017-03-13 00:00:00
---

Preface
=======

Welcome to our third installment of ["The Burge School of Functional
Programming"](http://jmct.cc/burge.html). We pick up right where we [left
off](http://jmct.cc/1/index.html) and put our understanding of expressions
to use. More specifically we're going to look at how Burge thinks about data
structures and then how he extends the simple language of expressions into
a rich surface language.

As before I will use the notation that Burge used, pointing out any differences
from modern notation as it arises.

Quick Recap
===========

Let's take a moment to remind ourselves of what we've learned so far. Namely,
what exactly is it that we mean by _expression_:

> An expression is
>
>  * either simple and is a identifier
>  * or a _lambda expression_
>        + and has a _bound variable_ which is an identifier
>        + and a _body_ which is an expression
>  * or it is a _function application_
>        + and has an _operator_ and an _operand_, both of which are expressions

It is important to keep this in mind. When things start to get intricate you can
always break it down into its constituent parts using the definition above.


Introduction
============

Data structures are fundamental to programming. Algorithms often only make sense
in relation to specific data structures. Because of this, changing the way you
think about data can often change the way you think about algorithms, or
programming more generally.

When comparing functional programming to other paradigms many people focus on
how you write functions (for obvious reasons). In this post we'll argue that
functional programmers also tend to think about data differently, and that this
is an important aspect of learning functional programming. Don't worry though,
expressions still take center stage, even when thinking about data structures :)

Once we've looked at how Burge discusses data structures we'll look at how he
builds upon the foundation of expressions to get a nicer syntax for actually
programming. Burge calls these 'additional forms', these days we call it
'syntactic sugar'.

Once we've done that we'll take a look at some example function definitions,
just so we can start getting feel for how Burge thinks about structuring
programs.

Data Structures
===============

TODO: write opening

Burge completely ignores how the data is physically represented on the machine.
Unlike C or Java, there's no notion of the position of data within a data
structure. Instead, Burge describes data structures with the following tools:

1. The _operations_ that the data structures provides
2. The rules that the operations must follow

If this seems too hand-wavy, that's okay. A few examples will help make the idea
clear.

Pairs
-----

Pairs are very simple structures. In C you might write:

```{c}
struct pair {
  int a;
  int b;
};
```

for a pair of `int`s. While concise and useful, this definition describes a lot
more than the _essence_ of what a pair is. When Burge introduces pairs, he says
only the following:

> A pair has a _first_ and a _second_.

and that's it!

What Burge means by this is that pair is only useful in that it allows you to
distinguish between two things.  In this vein Burge goes on to show that in
order to get everything you want out of pairs, you need 3 functions:

* `first`
* `second`
* `cpair`

`cpair` is a function that takes two things and makes a pair. `first` takes a
pair and returns the value of the first argument used when the pair was created,
and `second` returns the value of the second argument used when the pair was
created. So `cpair`, `first`, and `second` describe the operations that work on
pairs, but I said that there were also some rules that had to be followed. While
from the operations alone it might seem obvious what a pair 'is', the rules
actually help clarify that.

Burge tells us that pairs must follow the following three rules:

* `first (cpair x y)  == x`
* `second (cpair x y) == y`
* `cpair (first z) (second z) == z`

These rules are what ensure that a pair is only a pair _and nothing more_.
For example if you had another data structure that had the operations `first`,
`second`, and `third`, it would not satisfy the last rule above.

Because of this Burge does not allow operations on multiple structures to share
the same name as it could be confusing. Some modern functional languages do
allow this (Scala, and Haskell both have systems that allow such overloading),
but others, such as OCaml, still do not.

Using the terminology of types from the [last
post](http://jmct.cc/1/index.html), we can say that pairs introduce the
following functions and types:

$$

first \in A-B-pair \rightarrow A\\
second \in A-B-pair \rightwarrow B\\
cpair \in A \rightarrow B \rightarrow A-B-pair

$$

Lists
-----

Burge introduces lists with the following description:

> An $A-list$ either
>   is $null$
>   of has a $head$ which is an $A$ and a tail which is an $A-list$

So unlike pairs, when you have a list, you don't immediately know the shape of
it. It could be empty, which is what the $null$ signifies, or it could have at
least one element and 'the rest' of the list, which is what $head$ and $tail$
give you.

But being an empty list means you cannot 'get' anything from it. This is why
Burge gives the following types to the functions for lists

$$
null \in A-list \rightarrow truthvalue\\
head \in A-list \rightarrow A\\
tail \in A-list \rightarrow A-list
$$

Lists are an important concept in functional programming. Their ubiquity in
functional programming pedagogy is not without reason. Lists are not only
useful[^1], but they exhibit all of the interesting cases of data structures.

[^1]: The usefulness of lists is sometimes overstated, and they do tend to be
used in places where other structures (Maps, Arrays, etc.) would be more
appropriate. However, the fact remains that lists are useful.

Additional Forms
================

List Structured Arguments
-------------------------

Auxiliary Definitions
---------------------

Conditional Expressions
-----------------------

Circular Definitions
--------------------

Example Functions
=================

Conclusion
==========

Epilogue
========

TODO: Think of song.

-JMCT
